>> Shirley Wu: This is the part
that I think a lot of people were
asking about when we were
covering the entering.
So people were like,
if I have like not the same
number of things on like not
like if we have three reqs and
five data elements like what happens then?
So this is where we go over that.
And so,
>> Shirley Wu: When
we talk about enter update exit,
>> Shirley Wu: The way
to think about it is,
you have your first data set.
So you have your first state, and then you
have maybe something changes to that data.
So this was also the question previously
about what if you have live data coming
in, and then there's your first state,
and then some of the data changes, and
there's your second state, and
your third state, and your fourth state.
How do you account for
all of that data changing?
And maybe in your first data set, or
maybe your second data set has more or
less data points than you first data set.
How do I deal with that?
So one of things that I wanted to mention
is this kind of concept called object
constancy.
It's a really short article that
you guys can read afterwards,
but the really simple boiled
down is if you have data
that changes between states,
you want to make sure that for
each of those objects, that the user,
how do I describe this well?
That the user has a way of following
what happened to that object,
between one state to the next.
So the example here is, so
these are I think age bracket.
What's the percentage for each of the
states, so the y axis is the states and
then the x axis is the percentage
of people 65 years and older.
Or, and then there's all these different
options of like what about under 5 years,
5 to 13 years, etc.
So this is like,
all of these different data sets.
And then, you want to transition
between each of these data sets.
So then, right now it defaults
to 65 years but if I,
let's say, do 45 to 64,
notice that little transition.
So, some of the states have been pushed
down, some of the states come up.
Some of them stay on the screen
because they're the top.
I'm guessing this is ten.
And they're the top ten states, and
then maybe their bars just increase or
decrease in width.
>> Shirley Wu: Yeah,
>> Shirley Wu: This is what's happening,
and then underneath the hood
I haven't verified this but
I'm pretty sure Mike isn't
making like 50 bar graphs.
And transitioning those 50
bar graphs up and down,
he's making these ten rectangles and
then he's transitioning those in and out.
>> Shirley Wu: As you click
on the different states.
And then he's animating them in and
out or like wider or less wide.
So yeah,
that's the concept to object consistency.
And that's kind of like the reason why
D3 has this whole thing of enter and
exits to deal with it.
The examples I was going to show you,
>> Shirley Wu: Was
this visualization I did a few
months back of all of the lines in,
have you guys heard of
Hamilton the musical?
Okay, cool [LAUGH] I've been obsessed
with this for like the last almost year.
And so
I took each like one of these lines.
So each like bubble is a set of lines but
some by character and then visualize it.
So I do like a bunch of analysis
then I talk about it and
then you can like interact with it.
But the part that I want to show you,
all the way at the bottom.
>> Shirley Wu: Is this kind of concept
to like, here's all of the lines and
I build a filter tool for it.
So I can filter by let's say,
like Angelica.
And so here's all of the songs,
all of Angelica's lines and
her songs,
>> Shirley Wu: And
now maybe I also want to filter
by this like one theme and
then, so everything all gets faded out.
And then, just those lines are remain,
did you guys see that little like
transition where jump all the way up?
[INAUDIBLE] It jumped all the way up, and
then when I deselect, it comes back in.
>> Shirley Wu: Yeah,
>> Shirley Wu: And so,
that's kind of object constancy, right?
Like,
>> Shirley Wu: So
that you get a sense that,
there are data points that are staying,
there are data points that are leaving but
you kinda get the sense of,
them all I guess connecting together.
So this is the example I have.
And then we are going to,
this is a big section,
where we go into how that all works.
Yeah, are you guys excited?
[LAUGH] Cuz once we're past this hurdle,
the rest of D3 should be super easy.
Once you get this,
the rest of that library is all yours.
So the very key concept
about how the enter, update,
exit works is, thus far,
we've been using this .data function,
and remember how we only
pass in just this data,
right, like we've only been
doing that data, data.
But there's actually a second optional
argument that we can pass in called
the key function.
And that key functions essentially goes
through all of your like loops through
your data and then you return whatever
the key that identifying key for that data
should be, that data point should be.
So in this case, I'm just saying okay,
the data that I end up passing in
is just in that ray of integers.
So I'm just saying just
use my integer as my key.
If you have pass in let's
say a ray of objects and
each of your objects have an id attribute.
You can say use d.id as my key function,
or
u can use d.name as my key function.
The most important thing is that
your key function should return
unique results, unique strings,
or unique integers for each one of your
data points that's the only thing.
If you don't return unique strings for
each of your data points
D3 will get confused and think that
those two that have the same key,
are actually the same thing and
combine them together.
So you might get this bug of like,
you have like, ten data points,
but then you only see nine on the screen,
and you're super confused.
And that's because you didn't
give it unique identifiers,
unique yeah, IDs, keys, keys, IDs.
So that's the only thing to make
sure to be very careful of.
And then, so once we have that,
let's talk about .data, and
then key function and how it all works.
So this is,
let us pretend right now that we
have five rectangles on the screen.
And those rectangles have
data bound on them such
that these in the red are their keys.
Like what gets returned by the key
function for each of those rectangles.
And then this is my data set and
it has six data points.
And because like our key function right is
just really simply returning the value,
these are also their keys.
So, the first thing that
data like calculates for us,
is it figures out what your quote
unquote update selection is.
And what that means is it takes,
executes your key function and
it says okay on this side
this 120 maps to this 120.
So this 120 in the data maps
to the 120 in the rectangle.
And there's 250 in the date maps
to the 250 in the rectangle.
And so those are the two rectangles, these
are the two rectangles that match the data
so they're going to remain on the screen.
So that's the update selection.
Yeah, so the data calculates for
us the update selection.
The next thing that .data calculates for
us is our enter selection.
So it looks at both and
it says these are the data points and
there's 233, 145 and
75 are the data points that don't yet
exist in the rectangles because there's
no 230, or 300, or any of those.
So .dataset okay,
we need to create four rectangles,
create four rectangles to
be able to match the data.
And that's what's happening here and
that's the enter selection.
And finally .data calculates for
us it looks at the rectangle and says,
here are all the rectangles whose
key doesn't exists in the data.
So that's 100,
the rectangle with key 100 doesn't
have an equivalent on the data side,
same thing with 175 and 200.
And that .data calls
that the exit selection.
That's the three rectangles that we
need to get rid of from the screen,
from the DOM.
And to be able to match with the data.
How are we so far?
Do you want me to repeat any of that?
>> Speaker 2: I think I'm just a little
confused between the data values and
the keys, so
like the one, what your talking about
here are meant to be unique keys, right?
Like it's not the value itself.
>> Shirley Wu: Yeah.
>> Speaker 2: So
if it were like a time-series or
what if it's an index like 1 through
100 if we are 100 data values.
>> Shirley Wu: Yeah, and
that's perfectly fine,
yeah I did I 'm using data and
key like I'm using value and
key as like the same thing here for
the sake of simplicity.
But in practice you should be using,
you should create anything that
makes sense for you as the key.
So if that means for 100 values
just specifying one through 100,
[INAUDIBLE] and
if that works that is great.
If for example in our,
let's say our temperature dataset
that we've been working with.
We might use the date as our key, because
the dates are unique across the board.
And we wouldn't want to
use the temperature value,
because that's not unique.
>> Speaker 2: So it's almost
like a row number a little bit?.
>> Shirley Wu: Yeah.
>> Speaker 2: In a dataset.
>> Speaker 2: So when you're reading
your data your keys would just be all the
row numbers, associate with each value.
>> Shirley Wu: Yeah.
>> Speaker 2: And then,
if you'll need to show the first ten rows,
those are the keys you'll
pull out to this way.
>> Shirley Wu: Yeah, so the only thing is
make sure that those keys are the same
across all of your states.
So like if you, for your first state
only pull like rows one through 10,
but then your next state, you actually
pull rows, like 10 through 20, make
sure that these keys are 10 through 20 and
not 1 through 10 or anything like that.
And actually if you don't provide
a key function, what D3 does,
is under the hood it assumes
it kind of applies a key for
each of them, that's just the index.
So yeah,
it just uses the index as the key.
But for something like, for
if you're transitioning between different
states that have like different dates or
different categories, or
in the case of this object constancy,
the key function for
this one should be the states.
That's one when you want to make
sure not only are they unique but
that they're unique and
constant across all of your states.
Yeah, data states.
>> Shirley Wu: Question?
>> Speaker 3: Yes, we had a question about
the function that you
pass in to find the key.
Does it accept a second parameter for
the index?
>> Shirley Wu: Yes, it does so
the key function will accept both data or
it will give you both the data and index,
and you can then return any string or
integer you want.
I think the integer will just get coerced
into a string or something like that.
>> Speaker 3: Sorry,
one more question that just came in,
does D3 have anything built in for
sorting data?
>> Shirley Wu: No, I don't know
off the top of my head maybe in D3
array module, maybe.
So I do know that there is, just because
when it comes to manipulating the data,
I just use something like low dash,
and I don't use D3.
But I think D3 array might,
if you look into it D3 does,
however, have a sort function for
the selection.
So if you have an array, if you have
your selection of five rectangles and
you want to sort that because
somehow, it actually re-orders
the rectangle elements in the dom.
So, if you had five rects, and it was one,
two, three, four, five, and you wanted to
sort that the other way around, it
actually rearranges it in the dom itself.
So, that's selector.sort,
so d3selection.sort.
But, I'm not sure about array
sorting the data, yeah.
Yeah cool, is there anything else
that questions about enter exit.
The update selection, the enter selection,
and the exit selection.
Or was it straightforward enough,
straightforward enough?
Cool perfect, in that case,
let's go on to that console log again,
that's like super tiny.
So remember how we looked at this a little
bit underneath the hood but
I want to kind of emphasize this again.
So this is the, this groups part,
all the way towards the bottom,
that's your update selection.
>> Shirley Wu: And
then this enter section,
that's the four rectangle place
holders that we need to create.
And then this exit is the three rectangles
that I mentioned earlier that needs to be
removed, so
that all of this matches the new data set.
And I think a great way to think about
this is I was talking to Stu earlier, and
we were talking about how we want to think
about this as how like the whole point of
D3 is to, God,
what was the wording that we used?
>> Speaker 3: Describe.
>> Shirley Wu: So we want to
describe what we want on the screen,
so that when we get the data, that data
will be described on the screen correctly.
So I think a lot of the confusion with
D3 comes from the fact that we start
defining what we want to like we
started defining our rectangles and
our attributes and all of that even before
we have any elements on the screen.
And like, that whole like, like why
are we describing things that don't yet
exist is I think what
confuses a lot of people, but
if we kind of turn that
mentality around 180.
And instead of thinking of it as
elements to manipulate with the data,
rather, think of it as the data dictates
what showed up here on the screen.
And all you're doing is
describing once we get the data,
this is how that data should
look like on this screen.
So, yep.
>> Speaker 3: Yeah,
we have a question from Leo
about the enter exit update paradime.
>> Shirley Wu: Okay.
>> Speaker 3: I don't know if anybody
here is familiar with react, but
react invests blood and
treasure into figuring out whether or
not something needs to update at all.
And so, if you go into your data and
you just tweak one element, is it smart
enough to leave most of the dom alone and
only tweak just that one changed element?
Or does it re-render the entire thing?
>> Shirley Wu: Okay, so
I love that question.
So is, so
the example was react is really, wait
actually everybody hears the question.
So I don't know why I'm repeating it.
So I actually love comparing D3 with react
because the way that I think about it is
react is essentially doing under the hood
what D3, you have to do with D3 yourself.
And what I mean by that,
is react is really smart in figuring out
what is the smallest set of changes that
you need to make to get from
the first state to the next state.
Where as with D3,
the enter update exit, how much,
how the dom gets rerendered
is only as smart as you.
>> Speaker 3: [LAUGH]
>> Shirley Wu: As in D3 gives you all
of the control about what you want to do
with the enter update and exit selections.
So if you are smart about it and like,
okay, I only need to update these
attributes for the update selection,
and this the things that I need to do
with the enter and update selections.
And this is the thing that we need
to do with the enter selections,
if you make sure to think that through and
only manipulate,
like only edit where it's necessary then
it will have the same effect as react.
But if you are just like
update all these attributes
all the time on all the selections,
then it would just rerender dot and
the dom all the time, right.
So all D3 does is it
gives you what each of
those selections should be given the first
set of data and the second set of data.
And you figure out what to do
with each of the selections.